# Forecasting-sales-using-machine-learning-algorithms
Sales forecasting is quite a crucial aspect of business in today’s business environment. It helps to make better business decisions in the future that can help to increase sales revenue based on past information or historical data. 
I. INTRODUCTION
A. Background of the Study
In terms of sales forecasting, it can be seen that machine learning algorithms can be used by businesses in order to predict overall customer behaviors while using data analytics based on past experiences, which include past transactions, and demographic data as well. Machine learning can be referred to as one of the subfields of artificial intelligence or AI. However, it can be defined as the overall capability that a machine can have in order to imitate the intelligent behavior of humans as well. In this study, the concept of using machine learning in sales forecasting by companies can be seen. According to Cadavid et al (2018), forecasting sales can be determined as one of the common as well as essential use of machine learning or ML. However, sales forecasts are mainly used for defining the benchmarks including the incremental impacts related to new initiatives, plan resources, and more related to the overall expected demand along with project future budgets.
B. Rationale
Sales forecasting can be determined as an expression that reflects the expected sales revenue for an organization. With the help of sales forecasts, the success of company plans, as well as business strategies including their effectiveness to gen- erate revenue based on a certain time period can be evaluated. However, Karb et al (2020) stated that there are different types
of challenges that can be seen regarding sales forecasting while using machine learning or ML. The major challenges include time-intensive competition, expensive technology tools, poor knowledge, lack of required skills, and expertise, internal bias, as well as more. The main reason behind these challenges is the rapid evaluation of digital technologies like AI, and IoT, which also include ML as well. Moreover, the current challenges related to sales forecasting within ML can be solved and should be solved to help businesses predict the effectiveness of their business strategies. The current study is able to shed light on the potential solutions to the issues related to sales forecasting to help to improve the overall process of predicting sales revenue as well.
C. Aim of the Research
The current research study is aimed at determining the usability of machine learning (ML) in sales forecasting to help businesses predict sales revenue based on a certain time period.
D. Research Objectives
Based on the aim of the research, the research objectives are as follows:
• To determine the ways ML can help businesses in sales forecasting
• To evaluate the factors that can influence overall sales forecasting while using ML
• To highlight the challenges in sales forecasting while using machine learning
• To recommend potential solutions to the challenges E. Research Questions
According to the research aim and research objectives, the research questions have been developed, which are as follows: • How Machine Learning (ML) can help businesses in sales
forecasting?
• What are the factors that can influence overall sales
forecasting while using ML?
• What type of challenges in sales forecasting can be faced
while using ML?
• What are the recommended strategies or solutions to the
challenges?
 F. Significance of the Research
The current research is able to shed light on the overall concept of sales forecasting by using ML. However, the study is important because it can help to highlight the knowledge related to the sales forecasting process and the ways ML helps to predict sales revenue for businesses. Moreover, this study can also evaluate the challenges that can be seen related to the research topic along with the potential solutions to them.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Concept of sales forecasting and the significance of ML in it
Sales forecasting can be referred to as a process or ex- pression related to the overall sales revenue. Therefore, sales revenue can help to determine and also predict the overall sales of an organization based on a certain time period. In the view of Cadavid et al (2018), it can be seen that in sales forecasting machine learning algorithms can help to predict consumer behavior while using historical data that includes past transactions, and also demographic information. On the other hand, companies that are leveraging machine learning in order to forecast sales include Netflix, Facebook, Uber, Amazon, and more. In order to address the significance of ML in sales forecasting, it can be seen that Ml allows businesses to develop advanced forecasting methods that can be used in terms of large data sets with lesser human effort as well. According to Green (2022), the commercial use or application of ML can be referred to as more evident in the business processes, which include marketing, planning, as well as sales forecasting, and more. For example, a sales executive can predict by using predictive analytics in order to forecast the overall behavior of customers within a certain period of time.
B. Factors influencing sales forecasting using ML
In order to address the factors that are influencing sales forecasting while using ML, it can be seen that there are dif- ferent factors, which include economic factors, social factors, and also cultural factors related to the business environment as well. In the meantime, it is quite crucial to determine those fundamental factors in order to forecast sales effectively in order to develop the performance of the industry. It can be seen that economic factors within a country can help to identify the sales pattern. Analyzing this can help a business to predict the overall amount of cash flow within the entire market, whereas ML can help to assess the previous data to develop or improve the product based on the data to improve the sales. On the other hand, social factors include population, demographics, and more components that are related to the sales forecasting of a business. In terms of the situation, with the help of ML, businesses can develop customer segments based on market demands to increase sales revenue. Apart from that, cultural factors are also effective in sales forecasting, whereas the market demand can vary based on the overall culture of a country, which can influence the overall sales forecasting of a company even if it is using machine learning algorithms as well.
Fig. 1. Long Short-Term Memory or LSTM technique for sales forecasting (Source: Choi et al 2020)
C. Machine learning techniques used in sales forecasting
Based on the machine learning techniques used in sales forecasting, it can be seen that businesses are using different models, and among all of the models, regressive models can be referred to as one of the most common ones. Based on the regressive model technique of sales forecasting using ML, it can be seen that it includes linear regression, random forest regression, and XGBoost. All of these can be defined as some of the major and common sales forecasting techniques used by businesses with ML in Python (Cheriyan et al 2018). On the other hand, Long Short-Term Memory or LSTM can be referred to as a neural network used by companies to make predictions according to sequential data
Therefore, these are some of the major ML techniques that can be used by businesses in order to predict their overall sales revenue effectively based on historical data.
D. Challenges related to ML in sales forecasting and solutions
According to the situation, there are different types of challenges related to machine learning that can be seen while using it for sales forecasting. In the view of Karb et al. (2020), misunderstanding can be referred to as one of the major barriers that can be seen in this case and can disrupt the overall prediction of sales revenue for a business. In this case, the salesperson might not be able to determine the ideal platform to forecast the sales within a specific market as well. Furthermore, poor quality of data, poor infrastructure, and lack of knowledge regarding ML algorithms and Python coding can be referred to as some of the major challenges related to the useability of ML in sales forecasting. In order to recover from these challenges, it is recommended for companies to train their employees regarding new digital technologies like machine learning to help them gain the required knowledge and skill set. However, choosing effective historical data instead of selecting poor ones can also help to improve sales forecasting with ML to avoid any kind of disruptions.
E. Analysing the previous year sales
The purpose of this study is to suggest a factor for fore- casting Big Mart Companies’ upcoming sales while consid- ering their past sales. Machine learning models like Linear Regression, K-Neighbors Regressor, XGBoost Regressor, and Random Forest Regressor are used to conduct an extensive study on sales prediction. Data characteristics used in the

  Fig. 2. Research Onion (Source: Saunders et al. 2009)
forecast include item weight, fat content, visibility, kind, and MRP as well as the year the outlet was established, the size of the outlet, and the type of outlet site.
III. METHODOLOGY
A. Research Onion
Research onion can be referred to as a framework that can help the researcher to design a robust research methodology in this research. However, according to Saunders et al (2009), figure 1 can help to understand the research methods that will be used to conduct the current study.
B. Research Philosophy
“Research philosophy” is a set of assumptions that will be made by the researcher in this study based on the chosen research topic. However, there are different types of research philosophies that can be seen such as “Interpretivism re- search philosophy, positivism research philosophy, and real- ism research philosophy”. In this study, the researcher will select an “Interpretivism research philosophy”. In the view of Ryan (2018), it can help the researcher by offering effective viewpoints regarding the research topic based on positive perspectives of the social world. This is how the researcher will be able to gather the required data or information on the topic to reformulate the overall knowledge and understanding
C. Research Approach
“Research approach” can be referred to as a research method that will be used by the investigator to collect, analyze, as well as interpret the required data relevant to the current research topic. There are different types of research approaches that can be seen such as “deductive research approach, and inductive research approach”. However, the researcher will select the “deductive research approach” in this study. In the views of Woiceshyn and Daellenbach (2018), this can help the researcher to compare the application of logic and research statements to define the relationship between research concepts and variables.
Fig. 3. Highest weekly sales of month
D. Research Design and Strategy
“Research design” is a research method that can help the investigator to integrate different components relevant to the research study to provide a better overview. Furthermore, in this study, the researcher will be using a descriptive research design, which can help the investigator to determine the difference between the research logic and variables. Moreover, the researcher will choose a secondary qualitative research strategy in this study. It is quite convenient and also can help to save a lot of time as well as effort for the researcher.
E. Data Collection and Data Analysis
Data collection is the process of collecting relevant data as well as information on the chosen research topic. In this study, the researcher will select a secondary data collection method in order to collect the required qualitative information relevant to the research topic. It will help to understand the sales forecasting process while using machine learning as well (Martins et al 2018). Furthermore, based on the qualitative data, the investigator will do a thematic analysis to analyze the gathered data. However, all of the information will be gathered through different secondary data sources, which include books, journals, articles, newspapers, and others.
F. Ethical Considerations
The researcher will be following research ethics in order to develop a reliable study. For that, the researcher needs to consider the “Data Protection Act 2018” to protect the gathered information on the topic (legislation.gov.uk, 2022). Moreover, the researcher will be considering “The Copyright, design, and Patent Act 1998” as well to avoid any type of copyright issue in the research (legislation.gov.uk, 2022).
G. Data Visualization
The plotting weekly sales stated in monthly basis, to find out which month highest number of weekly sales. The figure3 shows how every month is distributed. Providing the highest number of week sales in the year, because it will be useful for the future works to upgrade the sales in upcoming year. If the organization understood the loss and profit so according to

  Fig. 4. Highest weekly sales of the year
 Fig. 5. Predicting highest sales
figure4 plotted graph, they can make some changes to the product.
Plotting the weekly sales in year and predicting the highest number of sales in these three years (2010,2011 and 2012)
The figure5 graph proves that the highest weekly sales is happened in the year 2010. The company can repeat the process happened in year 2010 to gain more sales and make some changes to gain a greater number of sales.
The figure6 graph shows highest number of sales in monthly basis and predicting in these three years.
Now we are going to predict the fuel price in weekly basis and, margin of fuel price varies by a week, shown in the figure7 graph,
Fig. 7.
IV. ALGORITHM USED
A. RANDOM FOREST REGRESSOR
By using a bagging technique, Random Forest is described as a group of decision trees that aid in producing accurate results. Two of the most popular ensemble strategies that aim to combat higher unpredictability and higher prejudice include bagging and boosting. We use a number of base learners, or base models, in bagging, and these base learners or base models then take different random sampling of records from the training dataset. Regressor decision trees are the foundational learners in the Random Forest framework and are trained using the data that they have gathered.[8]
Decision trees are not accurate learners by themselves because, when fully implemented, there is a strong likelihood of overfitting, which results in high training accuracy but low real accuracy. So, using a technique known as bootstrapping, we distribute samples of the main data file to each of the decision trees using row sampling and feature sampling with replacement. As a result, each model has been trained using all these data files, and anytime we give test data to any of the trained models already in existence, their predictions are combined such that the final output is the mean of all the outcomes produced. Here, the individual findings are aggregated, a process called as aggregation. The number of decision trees to be considered when developing a model is the hyperparameter that we need to control in this algorithm.[8]
B. CATBOOST REGRESSOR
CatBoost expands on gradient boosting and decision tree theory. The basic goal of boosting is to successively combine a large number of weak models, or models that just slightly outperform chance, in order to produce a strong, competitive predictive model through greedy search. Gradient boosting successively fits the decision trees, thus the fitted trees will learn from the errors of previous trees and thereby reduce the errors. Until the chosen loss function is no longer minimised, more functions are continually added to the already existing ones.
 Fig. 6. predicting Highest weekly sales of month

 Fig. 8.
On our test set, as seen above, we acquire an R-squared of 70 percentage, which is impressive given the limited feature engineering.
CatBoost provides the option to extract variable importance plots for making inferences. Consequently, a Variable Impor- tance Plot may be able to expose underlying data structures that are otherwise hidden.
V. RESULTS
Machine learning algorithms is used in this research to find the parameters of the dataset. The Algorithms used in this paper are Random Forest Regressor and Catboost Regression. The Algorithm gives the accuracy, Root Mean Squared Error, R2 and adjusted R2. The catboost regressor gives the better scores, so I suggest use this machine learning algorithm.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, forecasting of sales in previous year can improve the business sales in the future, by following this strategy. The accuracy for random forest 65percent and cat- boost 96percent. By getting these accuracy I suggest catboost is a better algorithm. Buying the products according consumer aspects will improve the business.
VII. EXPECTED OUTCOME
The current study is aimed at defining the use of machine learning in sales forecasting. However, the current study can help to provide an overview of the concept of sales forecasting and the ways businesses predict their sales revenue by using ML algorithms in Python. Moreover, the current research study can help to provide understanding and knowledge regarding the ML techniques used by businesses in sales forecasting
along with some strategies related to ML. According to the situation, it is expected that the current study can also shed light on the challenges related to ML that can be faced by businesses at the time of forecasting sales revenue. Moreover, it is also expected that the study can offer potential solutions to those issues in order to help businesses effectively use ML in sales forecasting.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
I’m very obligated to my supervisor Mahesha samaratunga suggestions, she helped me with dissertation and as well as with my personal circumstances. By her advice I could complete my dissertation successfully.
